+++
date = "2017-02-21T11:54:32-05:00"
title = "Left vs Right in the US"
topics = ["politics","philosophy", "opinion", "USA"]
tags = ["politics","philosophy", "opinion", "USA"]
draft = true

+++

# Introduction and Disclaimer

This article is purely my own opinion based on my observations.  I am not going to source very many if any of my statements within.  It's a thought experiment I had based on these observations and you are quite welcome to disagree with it or think I'm an idiot.  This came about while I was pondering how we got to where we are today. We have a very divisive political state of affairs in the US despite the two major parties seeming to have more in common than differences.

For the purposes of this article I'm going to use the term "Left" and "Right" respectively to refer to the political establishment within the US, respectively the Democrat and Republican political parties. Following a classical political philosophy model, all major parties and their constituent politicians fall to the right of center, and are strongly authoritarian.  We seek to examine why, but while this is the case, it is clear that the Democrats are still somewhat to the left of the Republicans, so the terms stick.

# The Narrative

I think we can gain a lot of insight into the differences between the parties from their narrative.  Despite their similarities, I think what holds most true is that the Left and the Right have different ideals of fairness, and those ideals of fairness drive the other policy decisions and the rhetoric around them.  The Left considers it unfair that some people have a bad turn in life, despite no evidence that they "deserve" it.  The idea of whether someone deserves what they have is a major component to Leftist thinking.  The Right considers it unfair to take what someone has and generally considers it a truism that even if people don't get what they deserve you should make the best with what you have.  A popular saying on the Right is that "Life isn't fair." and "You can't always get what you want."

Because of this key philosophical difference, the Left is portrayed by the Right as being full of whiners, hysterics, and bleeding hearts that are guided primarily by their emotions.  They can't help but feel bad for people who had a bad turn, and that's why they want to take from those who have to give to those who have not.  The Right is portrayed by the Left as a bunch of ignorant people guided almost entirely by greed.  They can't help but vote "against their own best interests" because while they might be working class, they see themselves as "temporarily embarassed millionaires".  Why give up what you have, when you could hold onto it, after all, you got yours?

# The Key Similarities

In both cases the Left and the Right are guided by a set of similar philosophical principles, so that while their motivations might be different, the outcome is mostly the same.  These key similarities are of supreme importance in explaining why despite changing the reigns between the Left and Right over decades in the US, we still see continued increases in Executive power, the erosion of citizen privacy, and an increasingly large government.

Perhaps the most important of these principles is that both the Left and the Right believe that "the ends justify the means".  That is, while both may have a different vision for the end, to get their they believe that anything that in their mind helps them towards that objective is a net positive even if it has negative consequences in the short-term.  As a side effect of this, for instance, both the Left and the Right believe that having more information leads to better decisions.  To facilitate this, both sides support far-reaching government surveillance programs.  After all, with this surveillance information the Left can identify people who have more than they deserve and might be hiding it, as well as identify people more accurately who deserve more but don't have it.  From the perspective of the Right, this information helps them identify people who are doing things which are diversive and "un-American" so that the hammer can be brought down on them, making justice a little less blind and a lot more effective, not to mention the military applications. By the same token, because redistribution of property and the protection of existing property titles are directly at odds, both sides feel its necessary to have a strong authoritarian government which can enforce their will with impunity while they're in power. 

Another principle that both the Left and the Right share is that it's important that people have jobs and are working.  While this has historically been an economic truism, we are soon approaching the cusp of being in a post-scarcity society because of the wonders of modern technology and automation which completely disrupts the idea that humans must have jobs to survive and provide their basic needs.  In the mind of the Left, it's the government's responsibility to ensure that the people have jobs as part of looking out for the general welfare of society.  In the mind of the Right, it's the responsibility of the government to assist business and then businesses will provide jobs as they grow.  While the motivations again differ, the outcome is largely the same.  The Left supports direct government action to create jobs programs similar to The New Deal, and the Right supports a large military and significant defense spending, which effectively create a jobs program.

# The Differences and Why They're a Distraction

The differences between the Left and the Right in the US mostly come down to single issues which they differ in opinion on based again on the core belief of whether life should be fair or not.  I'm not going to break down each of them individually, but a brief list of a few of the most common hot-buttons are: abortion, private firearms ownership, publicly funded healthcare, and immigration/foreign policy.  In each case, these issues form a core of what currently drives divisiveness in modern politics in the US.

My firm belief is that these issues are a distraction from the larger issue, which is the general erosion of freedom and privacy for citizens.  The advent of an era of "identity politics" recently has significantly worsened this situation and the divide.  No longer do people come together and say "look, we've got some problems, we disagree on how to solve them, let's talk about it".  Instead, we see people taking a stance on an issue and making it a part of their very personal identity, so that they're so entrenched in the issue that the thought of any sort of compromise disgusts them.

The amount of money, energy, airtime, protests, actual time, and political rhetoric spent on these issues dwarfs pretty much anything else. While these issues /are/ important, they are not the most important issue.  While we spin our wheels playing tug-of-war on these smaller issues, our freedom erodes daily and we get an increasingly more authoritarian government.  Ironically, authoritarianism appeals to the supporters of both the Left and the Right more and more as these single issues cause even more division because they see it as a pathway to "vanquish their foe".  A Leftist views an authoritarian government with a Leftist in power as a way to finally gain equality for all by having the government force it.  A Rightist views an authoritarian government with a Rightist in power as a way to finally ensure nobody can take what they already have by having the government get rid of all the people they believe are going to do so.

# Freedom is the Answer

A free people can negotiate, argue, discuss, compromise, agree, and contract their way through these issues with impunity because freedom leads to security.  The encroachment of "identity politics" is specifically because everyone on both sides feels insecure, both in their position and in themselves.  A free people gain confidence from having the freedom to make their own choices, guide the path of their own life, and form a unique self-identity which is multi-faceted.  Here's a snapshot of what freedom looks like with the issues which divide us, and guess what, neither side "wins" every battle:

* Abortion is legal, because the government shouldn't have the authority to determine what a person does with their own body as it violates the principle of autonomy
* Private firearms ownership is legal, because the government shouldn't have the authority to determine what things someone can and cannot own as it violates fundamental property rights.
* Publicly-funded healthcare can happen, but only if done by NGOs, as the government shouldn't have the authority to force one person to pay for another person.  The reason it matters how this is organized is that the government is an agency of collective action based on the threat or reality of death.  An NGO is an organization which acts as an agency of collective action based on voluntary participation.
* Immigration would be welcomed as long as it was done legally, as freedom of movement is important for both increased trade as well as being culturally conscious and informed.
* Free trade between countries would flourish as protectionist import tariffs are a tool of regulatory capture that flies counter to the freedom to contract.
* Our military would be used purely for defense, not for aggressive actions in other regions of the world.  A basic principle of freedom is that we all have the right of self-determination, which means we have no more right to say what another country should be doing than anyone else, but we do have the right to defend our own peoples and properties.
* Our military would be much smaller and less expensive, because the government should not be using its power to force people to pay for soldiers and guns used to repress their freedoms and a large military is only necessary for authoritarian and warlike means, peaceful assertive defense can be achieved with much less.

# How Do We Make Things Better?

That's the million-dollar question.  Honestly, I don't know.  I'm just really starting to distill my observations into an opinion and review what I know through that filter to see if it fits.  I think there are definitely people in the world who personally benefit greatly from our current divisiveness, because it gives them a much smaller arena in which to work and distracts the people away from other things they might do to their advantage.  Clearly, following the money indicates as much.  Perhaps the first handful of steps might be the following:

1. If you love freedom, run for public office.  Whether it's being an ombudsman or city councilman, or running for Senate.
2. Both in and out of office, fight for campaign finance reform and the overturn of the Citizens United decision.  Every person should have an equal voice, as self-determined and autonomous individuals in a free society.  While money or fame might gain someone access, it should never gain them control.
3. Listen to others.  Be willing to let people tell their stories.  Listen with empathy and argue with compassion.  There are cogent and valid points on both sides of any reasonable debate, acknowledging where your opponent is correct does not lose you points, it gains them.  

# Conclusion

I generally try to avoid discussing politics too much, although I'm known to post lengthy essays in the comments section on Facebook occasionally.  Since I love freedom, my take on things is usually to fight dis/mis-information and otherwise stay out of the fray.  I have a set of beliefs of my own, but the only one I think is worth fighting for is my belief that all people should be free and autonomous with equal opportunity for self-determination.  The rest of my beliefs are mostly irrelevant in the face of a world which is "post truth".  Ensuring that my peers are informed of the facts when they decide to debate each other is the best way I know how to disrupt the formation of "identity politics".

I was giving a lot of thought to this lately, partly because of my travels and the things I've seen during them.  If there is one thing that I can really sum up as the experience of travel, it's the deeper realization of all the facets of what it means to believe that "people are people, no matter where they come from or where they're going".  The deepening political divide in the US and the increasing toxicity of discussions is something I find deeply troublesome, as it's a death spiral of sorts for the idea of a Free Republic.  Ultimately, I strongly believe that freedom is worth saving and that the USA has the potential to once again be the most free country in the world.